# Learning Notes on Muon Optimizer Blog Post

Muon is an optimizer for the hidden layers in neural networks. It is used in the current training speed records for both NanoGPT and CIFAR-10 speedrunning. 

Many empirical results using Muon have already been posted, so this writeup will focus mainly on Muon's design. First we will define Muon and provide and overview of the empirical results it has achieved so far. Then we will discuss its design in full detail, including connections to prior research and our best understanding of why it works. Finally we will end with a discussion on standards of evidence in optimization research.

### Definition

Muon is an optimizer for 2D parameters of neural network hidden layers. It is defined as follows: $$\begin{array}{l}\textbf{Algorithm: Muon} \\ \hline \textbf{Require: }\text{Learning rate }\eta \text{, momentum } \mu \\ 1: \quad \text{Initialize }B_0 \leftarrow 0 \\ 2:\quad \textbf{for } t=1,... \textbf{ do}\\ 3:\qquad \text{Compute gradient }G_t\leftarrow\nabla_\theta\mathcal{L}_t(\theta_{t-1})\\ 4:\qquad B_t\leftarrow\mu B_{t-1}+G_t\\ 5:\qquad O_t\leftarrow \text{NewtonSchulz5}(B_t)\\ 6:\qquad \text{Update parameters }\theta_t\leftarrow\theta_{t-1}-\eta O_t\\ 7:\quad \textbf{end for}\\ 8:\quad \textbf{return }\theta_t \end{array}$$ where 'NetwonSchulz5' is defined to be the following *Newton-Schulz* matrix iteration:
```python
# Pytorch code
def newtonschulz5(G, steps=5, eps=1e-7):
    assert G.ndim == 2
    a, b, c = (3.4445, -4.7750, 2.0315)
    X = G.bfloat16()
    X /= (X.norm() + eps)
    if G.size(0) > G.size(1):
        X = X.T
    for _ in range(steps):
        A = X @ X.T
        B = b * A + c * A @ A
        X = a * X + B @ X
    if G.size(0) > G.size(1):
        X = X.T
    return X
```

When training a neural network with Muon, scalar and vector parameters of the network, as well as the input and output layers, should be optimized by a standard method such as AdamW. Muon can be used for 4D convolutional parameters by flattening their last three dimensions. 


### Results

Muon has achieved the following empirical results. 
- Improved the speed record for training to 94% accuracy on CIFAR-100 from 3.3 to 2.6 A100-seconds
- Improved the speed record for training to 3.28 val loss on FineWeb (a competitive tasks known as *NanoGPT speedrunning*) by a factor of 1.35x
- Continued showing training speed improvements while scaling to 774M and 15B parameters
- Trained a 1.5B parameter transformer to GPT-2 XL level performance on HellaSwag in 10 8xH100-hours. Using AdamW to achieve the same result takes 13.3 hours.


### The design of Muon

Muon (MomentUm Orthogonalized by Newton-Schulz) optimizes 2D neural network parameters by taking the updates generated by SGD-momentum, and then applying a Newton-Schulz (NS) iteration as a post-processing step to each of them before applying them to the parameters.

The function of the NS iteration is the approximately *orthogonalize* the update matrix, i.e., to apply the following operation: $$\text{Ortho}(G)=\argmin_O\{\|O-G\|_F:\text{either }O^TO=I\text{ or }OO^T=I\}$$ In other words, the NS iteration effectively replaces SGD-momentum's update matrix with the nearest semi-orthogonal matrix to it. This is equivalent to replacing the update by $UV^T$, where $USV^T$ is its singular value decomposition (SVD).

#### Why is it good to orthgonalize the update?

And for an empirically-flavored motivation, we observe that based on manual inspection, the updates produced by both SGD-momentum and Adam for the 2D parameters in transformer-based neural networks typically have very high condition condtion number. That is, they are almost low-rank matrices, with the updates for all neuron being dominated by just a few directions. We speculate that orthogonalization effectively increases the scale of other "rare directions" which have small magnitude in the update but are nevertheless important for learning. 

#### Eliminating alternatives to NS iteration

There are several other options besides NS iterations for orthogonalizing a matrix. In this subsection I'll describe why we didn't use two of them. 

SVD (i.e., computing the $USV^T$ decomposition of the update and then replacing the update with $UV^T$) is easy to understand, but we don't use it because it's far too slow.

Coupled Newton iteration is used in implementations of Shampoo to perform inverse-fourth roots, and can be easily adapted to perform orthogonalization. But we don't use it because we find that it must be run in at least float32 precision to avoid numerical instability, which makes it slow on modern GPUs. 

In comparison, we find that Newton-Schulz iterations can be stably run in bfloat16. We therefore select them are our method of choice to orthogonalize the update.

#### Proving that NS iteration orthogonalizes the update

To understand why the NS iteration orthogonalizes the update, let $G=USV^T$ be the SVD of the update matrix produce by SGD-momentum. Then running one step of the NS iteration with coefficients $(a,b,c)$ yields the following output: $$G':=aG+b(GG^T)G+c(GG^T)^2G$$ $$=(aI+b(GG^T)+c(GG^T)^2)G$$ $$(aI+bUS^2U^T+cUS^4U^T)USV^T$$ $$=U(aS+bS^3+cS^5)V^T$$ In general, if we define the quintic polynomial $\varphi(x)=ax+bx^3+cx^5$, then applying $N$ steps of NS iteration with coefficients $(a,b,c)$ yields the output $U\varphi^N(S)V^T$, where $\varphi^N(S)$ indicates applying $\varphi$ $N$ times elementwise to the singular values that make up the diagonal of $S$.

As a result, to guarantee that the NS iteration converges to $\text{Ortho}(G)=UV^T$, all we need to do is (1) ensure that the initial entries of $S$ lie in the range $[0,1]$, and (2) select the coefficients such that $\varphi^N(x)\rightarrow 1$ as $N\rightarrow\infty$ for all $x\in [0,1]$.

To satisfy the first criterion, we simply replace $G$ by $G/\|G\|_F$ before starting the NS iteration. This rescaling is benign because $\text{Ortho}(cG)=\text{Ortho}(G)$.

To satisfy $\varphi^N(x)\rightarrow 1$ as $N\rightarrow\infty$, we have some freedom, as there are many possible choices of $(a, b, c)$ with this property. Later we will optimize this choice, but for now we show in the below plot that the simple baseline $(a,b,c)=(2,-1.5,0.5)$ already works.

#### Tuning the coefficients

Although the NS coefficients $(a,b,c)=(2,-1.5,0.5)$ work perfectly fine for orthogonalizing the update, they can be further tuned to reduce the number of NS iteration steps we need to run.

For tuning the coefficients $(a,b,c)$, we have the following considerations:
1. We want to make $a$ as large as possible, since the fact that $\varphi'(0)=a$ implies that this coefficient is what controls the rate of convergence for small initial singular values.
2. For every $x\in [0,1]$, we want $\varphi^N(x)$ to converge to a value in the range $[1-\epsilon, 1+\epsilon]$ as $N\rightarrow\infty$, so that the result of the NS iteration is not far from $\text{Ortho}(G)$.

The surprising observation here is that empirically, $\epsilon$ can be as high as around $0.3$ without harming the loss curve for Muon-based trainings. Therefore, our goal will be to maximize $a$ subject to $\lim_{N\rightarrow\infty}\varphi^N(x)\in [0.7, 1.3]$.

There are many possible approaches to solve this constrained optimization problem. We use ad-hoc gradient based approach and end up with the coefficients $(3.4445, -4.7750, 2.0315)$, which is what we use for the final design of Muon. The behaviour of these coefficients can be seen in the figure below. Note the steeper growth around $x=0$.

In our experiments, when using Muon with these coefficients to train transformer language models and small convolutional networks, it suffices to run the NS iterations for only 5 steps. 

We also considered using third-order and secenth-order polynomials for the NS iterations, but found that these could not improve the wallclock overhead any further.

